The Project Gutenberg eBook of Willow's forge, and other poems
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Willow's forge, and other poems

Author: Sheila Kaye-Smith

Release date: February 27, 2025 [eBook #75479]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Erskine Macdonald, 1914

Credits: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLOW'S FORGE, AND OTHER POEMS ***





                    WILLOW’S FORGE AND OTHER POEMS




                         _BY THE SAME AUTHOR_


THE TRAMPING METHODIST

 ‘We cannot too highly recommend this book. It is a remarkable first
 attempt. It is quite without crudeness. The atmosphere of this novel
 is sweet--it smells of summer and shines of the stars.’--_Daily
 Chronicle._


STARBRACE

 ‘It is difficult not to be unduly enthusiastic over Miss Kaye-Smith’s
 book.... This fine, tragic, poetic book is a welcome sign that the
 spirits of Borrow and Stevenson are still in our midst.’--_Standard._


SPELL LAND

 ‘If I were to state exactly the position which I believe this author
 will take among the great masters of English fiction, you might accuse
 me of exaggeration.’--_Punch._

                   Published by G. BELL & SONS LIMITED
                   York House, Portugal Street, London


ISLE OF THORNS

 ‘We have found ourselves over and over again simply lost in
 admiration.... No one should miss this book.’--_Pall Mall Gazette._

                    Published by CONSTABLE & CO. LTD.
                     10 Orange Street, London, W.C.




                             WILLOW’S FORGE
                            AND OTHER POEMS

                                   BY
                           SHEILA KAYE-SMITH


                                 LONDON
                           ERSKINE MACDONALD
                                  1914




                               CONTENTS


BALLADS--
                                                                    PAGE
WILLOW’S FORGE                                                         7

THE BALLAD OF A MOTOR BUS                                             10

THE SONG OF JACOB BOEHME                                              14

THE COUNSEL OF GILGAMESH                                              18

THE BALLAD OF THE QUICK AND DEAD                                      20

THE BALLAD OF DIVINE COMPASSION                                       23


THE LAST GOSPEL--

1. DEDICATION                                                         27

2. LOVE CAST OUT                                                      28

3. HOLY INNOCENTS                                                     30

4. TO MY BODY--A THANKSGIVING                                         32

5. FUNERAL MARCH OF A FALLEN HERO                                     34

6. ‘I AM ALPHA AND OMEGA’                                             36


CANT SONGS--

THE SCAMPSMAN’S NIGHT                                                 38

A DEUCED MORAL LAY                                                    39

CAST FOR LAG                                                          40

TO A COMRADE SPED                                                     41


MISCELLANEOUS--

BRIDE’S SONG                                                          43

IMMORTALITY                                                           44

THE OPTIMIST                                                          47

RESURRECTION                                                          49

A PRAYER                                                              51




Willow’s Forge


    I’ve crossed the fields from Lattenden
      And haunted Honey Mill,
    My feet and all my clothes are torn.
      Yet on I stumble still--
    I must not stay to speak to you
      Or falter with my pain,
    But hasten on to Willow’s Forge,
      At the bottom of the lane.

    Folk call me mad--perhaps ’tis true--
      My life is full of fears,
    At whiles I bite my arms, and then
      I wash the blood with tears.
    I scream, I talk to owls and crows,
      Hear voices from the sky,
    I see the spooks that ride o’ nights--
      Men shudder when I’m nigh.

    My love was hanged for stealing sheep,
      ’Twas that which sent me mad--
    He was a liar and a thief,
      But O I loved my lad!
    I’ve wandered wildly ever since,
      And last night, ’neath the Wain,
    I saw my love at Willow’s Forge,
      At the bottom of the lane.

    His face was wan, his burning eye
      Was like a coal from hell
    (He’s with the damned souls, all folk say,
      But O I love him well!)
    His hands were misty as the moon
      That bathed his awful brow,
    His lips and breast were smeared with blood,
      His cheeks were white as snow.

    ‘O tell me, love, where have you been
      This weary sleepless while?
    I’ve screamed and wept to kiss your lips,
      I’ve hungered for your smile.
    Have you been down among the damned,
      Where, like the sheep in fold,
    The dead men lie, and bleat and cry
      And shiver in the cold?

    ‘Have you been up to where the clouds
      Are sailing in the blue,
    And have they thrown you down, and said
      ’Twas no fit place for you?
    Or have you roamed all Sussex through
      In weariness and pain,
    To meet me here at Willow’s Forge,
      At the bottom of the lane?’

    He nothing said at all, but stared
      With glazed and dreadful eye,
    His red lips shook, as if he strove
      To part them with a cry.
    He could not speak, and O I thought
      He’d shiver from my sight,
    And leave me lone at Willow’s Forge,
      In the terror of the night.

    ‘O kiss me lad, before you go!’
      I cried, and raised my head.
    He stooped his scarlet lips to me,
      The living kissed the dead.
    But O his mouth was all on fire,
      And burned my cheek and hair,
    I screamed aloud, and he had gone,
      And left me waiting there.

    I told my mother what had passed,
      She shuddered at my tale--
    ‘You’ve seen the moonlight through the trees
      That shiver in the gale;
    And as for your burnt cheek, my girl,
      Which makes you sob with pain,
    You’ve kissed the fire at Willow’s Forge,
      At the bottom of the lane.’

    But though she speak, and though I hear,
      I will not aught believe
    But that at last I’ve met and kissed
      The lad for whom I grieve.
    And if I haunt the meeting spot,
      I’ll see him there again--
    That’s why I haste to Willow’s Forge,
      At the bottom of the lane.




The Ballad of a Motor ’Bus


    You get in at Ludgate Circus,
      Where in regiments they stand,
    All throbbing underneath the bridge,
      And pointing to the Strand--
    All pageantry with colours,
      All poetry with words,
    Wait those blazoned motor-’buses
      In their fiercely panting herds.

    There are ’buses for the East,
      There are ’buses for the West,
    For North and South and Central
      And where heaven pleases best--
    For the Elephant and Castle,
      Gospel Oak and Parson’s Green,
    Some for Chelsea, some for Putney,
      Some for Barnes, and some for Sheen.

    There are some that cross the river,
      And they see the steamers crawl
    With dirty belching smoke-stacks
      To the Pool or London Wall--
    They rumble down the dingy streets
      Where dingy houses grow
    Like quickly sprouting toadstools
      In an evil yellow row.

    And some go plunging northward
      Up the hills to Kensal Rise,
    And some are bound for Hampstead
      And the smokeless windy skies,
    And some go east to Hackney,
      And the long Commercial Road,
    Past the buying and the selling,
      To poverty’s abode.

    But the ’bus I take goes westward--
      It leaves Charing Cross behind,
    Then it bounds up Piccadilly,
      Through the smokey dusty wind--
    The first lamps have been lighted,
      And across St James’s Park
    The early lights of Westminster
      Are splashing on the dark.

    The dusk is falling gently,
      And from the streets below
    The London glare climbs upward
      To make the sad skies glow--
    Through the mingled dusk and dazzle
      We hum swiftly on our way,
    While the wind brings to our faces
      The first damps of the day.

    It is Summer, it is evening,
      Early stars are in the sky,
    Shining dim above the smoke-wreaths,
      While the western bonfires die--
    And the wind sings of the river
      That beyond the city flows,
    Of the pleasant westward reaches
      That no cargo-tramper knows.

    So we spin through holy Brompton,
      We leave Kensington behind,
    We thunder down to Fulham,
      Past churches tall and blind--
    Till we come at last to Putney,
      And the starlit river gleams
    Through darkness up to Richmond,
      A thoroughfare of dreams.

    And it’s there that you are waiting,
      O my faithful love, for me!
    Through the dark your eyes are straining
      My chariot to see--
    For the working-day is over,
      All its dust and hurry past,
    And we go to the river,
      With my hand in yours at last.

    While the motor-’bus rolls onward--
      And we stop to watch it tear
    All burning through the twilight,
      Mysterious and fair.
    It was our love’s bright chariot,
      The torch of our desires,
    Kindling the London darkness
      With youth’s eternal fires.

    O youth!--O youth in London!
      Shall they ever be forgot,
    Those young and eager footsteps
      On pavements hard and hot?
    The dust is in the breezes,
      Stinks of petrol stain the air,
    But youth has come to London,
      And has found a garden there.




The Song of Jacob Boehme


    The wild fowl hath not seen it,
      No vulture flown so high,
    The lion’s whelp hath not trodden,
      Nor the fierce lion passed by,
    The crags and the abysses
      Of that most lonely way,
    Which windeth in the mountains,
      And leadeth to the May.

    The chymist labours nightly,
      No travail will he shirk,
    If he can hope to finish
      The Philosophic Work.
    Mercury, salt, and sulphur,
      In Athanor are they,
    But through their transmutation
      He cannot find the May.

    And I am but a cobbler,
      At work from morn till night,
    A poor and silly groundling
      Who scarce can read or write;
    With cares of trade and household
      I struggle all the day,
    But I have trod the mountains,
      And I have found the May.

    --The May of glancing sunshine,
      The May of glowing flowers,
    Of singing birds, and breezes,
      And swift leaf-scented showers.
    No more I fear the Turba,
      For I have seen God play
    Among the dews and lilies
      Of the Eternal May.

    O I have found the spring-time
      Of green sun-spotted shade!
    O I have found the garden
      Where roses never fade!
    O I have learned the secrets
      And signs of all the sky,
    And wrought the Magnum Opus
      Of holy Alchemy!

    The salt Impress of Saturn
      Is mine, and Luna’s Form,
    And Mercury’s sharp Flagrat,
      And Mars’ most ruddy storm,
    Mine is the young child Venus,
      Mine Jupiter’s pure might,
    I haunt the sacred Houses,
      I read the dooms of night.

    The magical Triangles
      Have shown me what they hold
    Of light and corporiety,
      Of bitterness and gold,
    I saw God in the garden,
      I saw Him on the Tree,
    Dying to bring back Adam
      Into the Liberty.

    Men laugh, and call me crazy,
      The pastor saith I’ve sought
    To overturn the doctrines
      That Martin Luther taught.
    My books he burnt, with curses,
      And I have heard him tell
    Good Christians to avoid me
      As they would flee from hell.

    The astrologers all mock me,
      The learned chymists cry,
    ‘What hath this child to tell us
      About our Alchemy?’
    I have felt drought and hunger,
      Met lions in the way,
    Been wounded in friends’ houses,
      But I have found the May.

    --The May of glancing sunshine,
      The May of glowing flowers,
    Of singing-birds, and breezes,
      And swift leaf-scented showers.
    No more I fear the Turba,
      For I have seen God play
    Among the dews and lilies
      Of the Eternal May.

    O hearken then, thou Magus,
      And let thy love be sure,
    Give worship to the Artist,
      And keep his pattern pure,
    O labour in the lubet!
      And I shall humbly pray
    That thou become a Champion,
      And find at last the May.

    The magical Triangles
      Shall both at last be one,
    Adam return to Paradise,
      The Mighty Work be done;
    Then the meek holy servants
      Shall see their God at play--
    O haste the time, great Master,
      When all men find the May!




The Counsel of Gilgamesh

    ‘Gilgamesh, why dost thou wander around?
    Life, which thou seekest, thou canst not find.’

    _Epic of Gilgamesh._


    Why wander round, Gilgamesh?
      The sun that set to-night
    Shall climb the sky to-morrow,
      And bake the world with light.
    Throughout undying ages
      The sun shall set and rise
    As it hath set and risen
      From dim eternities.

    Why wander round, Gilgamesh?
      Why vainly wander round?
    What canst thou find, O seeker,
      Which hath not long been found?
    What canst thou know, O scholar,
      Which hath not long been known?
    What canst thou have, O spoiler,
      Which dead men did not own?

    The camel of the desert,
      The wild ape of the wood,
    Tread the white bones of heroes
      Who in thy place once stood;
    Like thee, they felt the sunshine,
      Like thee, they loved the day,
    Like thee, they sought and suffered--
      And thou shalt be as they.

    And other men, Gilgamesh,
      Shall seek what thou dost seek,
    And to their youth and ardour
      Thy rotting bones will speak.
    They will not heed thy counsel,
      They too will wander round,
    And waste their years in seeking
      That which hath long been found.

    Why wander round, Gilgamesh?
      Why vainly wander round?
    What canst thou find, O seeker,
      Which hath not long been found?
    What canst thou know, O scholar,
      Which dead men did not know?

    And this was asked in Nineveh
      Thousands of years ago.




The Ballad of the Quick and Dead


    And every night I sit alone,
      And every night I see
    A little cotton-aproned ghost
      Who takes no heed of me.

    She sets the milk, she sets the bread,
    One scarce would know that she was dead--
      But long ago death gave her greeting,
    In the great bed whence one can see
    The sunset in the cherry tree,
      And hear the fold-bound wethers bleating.

    In a far country lives the man
      Who loved this little maid,
    He knows not, cares not, that each night
      His supper here is laid.

    She lays it as in twilights gone,
    When, all the farmstead labour done,
      His passion in her arms would take
    Its daylong waited recompense--
    And her lost peace and innocence
      She gave ungrudging for his sake.

    She lived for love, she died for love,
      Though love was agony,
    And here, where joy was sold for love,
      She loves eternally.

    He does not care--he wanders far,
    Where light and wine and pleasure are;
      He strives and battles to forget
    The little cottage dove he caught,
    Who gave so much and asked for naught,
      And haunts the crumbling farmhouse yet.

    O Lord, how happy I should be,
      If one my heart holds dear
    Would come and spread the board for me,
      As she who rambles here!

    I should not wander far away,
    Or struggle to forget the day
      I loved, but to her straight would speed,
    And pledge the cup and break the bread
    With one who has been ten years dead--
      Ah, that were heaven indeed!

    It may not be--no dreams of me
      Disturb her quiet sleep;
    She little knows that dreams of her
      Wake me each night to weep.

    I never mocked her confidence,
      Or robbed her of her innocence,
    But with both hands I gave her all
      I had to give--she did not see
    My love, she never thinks of me,
      She comes not when I call.

    So every night I sit alone,
      And every night I see
    A little cotton-aproned ghost
      Who takes no heed of me.

    This is the tragedy of love,
      By all men be it read,
    ’Tis thus the dead dream of the quick,
      The quick dream of the dead.

    This is the mockery of love,
      By all men be it read,
    ’Tis thus the dead forget the quick,
      The quick forget the dead.




The Ballad of Divine Compassion


    The halls of heaven were full of joy,
        The quivering air was blue
    With incense, and with candles gay
    The mansions of eternal day
        Were gleaming through and through.

    The Saints in Glory danced and sang
        In robes of glittering white--
    Till heaven with their music rang,
    The Saints in Glory danced and sang,
        And filled themselves with light.

    Through groves of trees and lawns of flowers
        They trod the mystic maze
    Of many a sacred rigadoon,
    Danced to a fiddling angel’s tune,
        With endless roundelays.

    One only walked apart and sighed,
        In all that blissful horde,
    Shrank from the revel, and alone
    Poured from an aching heart his moan,
        And He was Christ the Lord.

    He leaned across the fiery gate
        Which stands above the stars,
    And from the fields where angels dwell
    Shuts the red cemeteries of hell
        With seven burning bars.

    He leaned above the direful deep
        Where tortured spirits lie,
    He saw their helpless agonies,
    He saw their wild and weeping eyes
        Turned up towards the sky.

    And all the sorrows of His heart
        Were grinding in His breast,
    He longed to comfort those poor sheep,
    To give them drink, and let them sleep
        On the green hills of rest.

    Nought were to Him the heavenly fields,
        The flocks His blood had bought,
    He thought alone of His lost sheep,
    Of those who toss, and starve, and weep,
        Whom He had vainly sought.

    And as the Saviour watched them there
        In all their sweat and fear,
    His love and longing rose so high,
    That from His tender, pitying eye
        There fell a holy Tear.

    The tear rolled down, until it dropped
        Into the blackest hell,
    And straight there were strange things to see
    Within that pit of misery
        Where the pure token fell.

    The Tear became a mighty sea,
        Which raged, and roared, and rolled,
    And filled each black and gaping gorge,
    And quenched each red and belching forge,
        And wrecked each towering hold.

    And all the lost and sinning souls
        Were borne upon its waves--
    By that one Tear the Saviour wept
    The doomed of ages all were swept
        Out of their living graves.

    And, carried on the heaving tide,
        The lost souls rose to heaven,
    Tumbling and drowning, hand in hand,
    They reached the coolness of that land
        Where all things are forgiven.

    Women, and men, and children too,
        All blasted, scorched, and red,
    Were washed up to the Saviour’s feet,
    By that one Tear of pity sweet
        His loving eye had shed.

    The Saints in Glory danced and sang,
        They sang and danced so high
    They saw not that their Lord was gone,
    Or that His white and fiery throne
        Stood empty in the sky.

    They saw Him not as He stooped down
        To lift each cowering slave,
    They saw Him not, so great their bliss,
    On each scarred forehead lay His kiss,
        As sign that He forgave.

    He could not take those guilty ones
        To where the guiltless throng
    Pealed forth their own salvation’s praise,
    And through the everlasting days
        Shouted their triumph song.

    He led them to the wilderness,
        Where stood the Holy Cross,
    And from the timber of that Tree
    He built a house of welcome, free
        To those lame sons of loss.

    The Saints in Glory feasted on
        The honey-dews of heaven,
    So all those sinners had for food
    Was their Lord’s body and His blood,
        To their great hunger given.

    The Saints in Glory danced and sang,
        Nor missed Him from their sport,
    And so He made His dwelling-place
    With the poor pensioners of grace
        His pardoning love had bought.

    And never to the halls of bliss
        He lifts a longing eye,
    The poor souls never hear Him groan,
    Or sigh because His great white throne
        Stands empty in the sky.

    He leads them through the wilderness,
        He makes their faces wet
    With water from a desert steam,
    The black past as an evil dream
        He helps them to forget.

    He is the comforter of those
        Whom stormy seas have tossed,
    He dries the eyes of those that weep,
    He is the shepherd of lame sheep,
        The Saviour of the Lost.




THE LAST GOSPEL


1. Dedication

          When Mass is said,
          The music dead,
    And the last lights upon the Altar-throne
    Drop slowly one by one into the dark,
          To the east
          Turns the Priest,
    And bows his knee before the sacred Ark
    And whispers the Last Gospel through--alone.

          So do I
          When dreams die,
    And love’s last wretched candle-lights are seen
    Darkening upon the Altar of your heart,
          Face the east,
          And like the Priest
    Say my Last Gospel through ere I depart,
    And before leaving bow to What Has Been.




2. Love Cast Out


    A victim crowned am I,
      Crowned, piercèd, and adored,
    In my eyes a flame of fire,
      In my heart a sword.

    Christ is my brother dear,
      Sister to Christ am I,
    For He has felt the thirsty wound
      That I must perish by.

    He came a king uncrowned,
      Unrobed, the Son of Loss,
    And so they pierced His body through,
      And hung Him on the cross.

    And my love wore no robe,
      And my love wore no crown,
    My love a pilgrim was, and trod
      The roads in pilgrim’s brown.

    And since my love went thus,
      A stranger and a dove,
    You built a cruel wooden cross,
      And crucified my love.

    And now you bend the knee
      --As now we Christ adore--
    And set your bleeding sacrifice
    At God’s right hand above the skies,
      To worship evermore.

    The third day, from the dead
      The Saviour rose again,
    He put on robes of royalty,
      And sat Him down to reign.

    But my love shall not rise,
      My love shall rest and sleep,
    My love is tired, why should it wake,
      That your eyes may not weep?

    For Christ the Saviour has
      A gentler heart than mine,
    He lets you crown what you did kill,
    Of His torn body eat your fill,
      And make His blood your wine.

    You shall not use me so--
      Go far, the world is wide;
    Why should you wake from its poor rest
      The heart you crucified?

    Beneath the tender ground
      My love shall sleep for aye,
    No last trump for my love shall sound
      No resurrection day.

    A victim crowned am I,
      Crowned, piercéd, and adored,
    In my eyes a flame of fire,
      In my heart a sword.




3. Holy Innocents


    To-day I keep a feast, with red and white--
      The red blood and the snow-white innocence
      Of little souls who had their recompense
    Before they learned the horrors of the fight.

    I see them running in their gardens gay,
      They snatch the colours of the rainbow’s flame,
      And throw the stars about in childish game,
    And pull the clouds to pieces for their play.

    But these are not the throng the king did slay,
      The babes for whom dark Rachael’s head is bowed--
      ’Tis not for them her wailing rings so loud;
    Other and holier Innocents are they.

    These are the little ones who never wrought
      Love’s royalest wonder in a mother’s eyes,
      Who never brought a tender warm surprise
    With groping lips to breasts till then unsought.

    These are the fruit of hundredfold desires,
      Ten thousand dreams begot this laughing band,
      They fill the cities of a promised land--
    Long promised, but not given--lost in fires.

    These are the children I had hoped to show
      The secret of this life, and all its love--
      But they are playing with my dreams above,
    While I plunge on through my dead hopes below.

    Saved--Oh perhaps from much that I must brave--
      I worship you, sweet saints!--oh pray for me!
      The little children that shall never be--
    The little children I shall never have.




4. To My Body--A Thanksgiving


    Though thou hast set me many a snare,
      And cost me many a groan,
    And causéd feet to slip that were
      Far dearer than my own--
    Though thou hast been both sword and gin
      To others and to me,
    Yet I recall what thou didst win
      Once for my soul, and I give thanks to thee.

    For once, when all my heavens fell,
      And each hour that went by
    Brought nearer to the pit of hell
      The Dayspring which is I--
    When all unheard the highest cried,
      When lost were course and goal,
    When hope had fled and faith had died--
      Thou, even thou, didst then redeem my soul.

    Thou broughtest me unto the snow,
      And thou didst force through me
    The pumping blood, that I might know
      How fierce my flesh could be;
    My flesh--till then half love, half dread--
      Became an armoured tower,
    To which my wounded spirit fled,
      And found a refuge in its bitter hour.

    Thou didst deny the healing sleep
      Unless I strove all day
    With thews and muscles, fierce to keep
      The wolves of thought at bay;
    And thou didst crown thyself with strength,
      And lift thyself on high,
    And free salvation win at length
      For the poor soul that thought it was to die.

    Redemption thou didst work for me,
      And forth into the light
    Crept my healed spirit, saved by thee
      From all the hells of night--
    And this I never shall forget,
      And so I can forgive
    Thy treacheries, and thank thee yet,
      For ’tis through thee I have found grace to live.

    And more, for I know that some day
      A greater wonder thou
    Shalt work for me, when thou shalt slay
      What thou hast quickened now.
    As once thy life did make me whole,
      So once thy death shall reap
    Both for thyself and for my soul
      The last redemption of a long, long sleep.




5. Funeral March of a Fallen Hero


    Sound the trumpet, beat the drum,
      Lay the purple on his breast,
    Let my shuddering memories come
      To salute him in his rest,
    To bow down to his disgrace,
    While I cover up his face.

    Once he led my soul to war,
      And the thunder of his cry
    Went before me, fierce and far,
      Calling me to triumph or die;
    To his sword I owe my place,
      But I cover up his face.

    Scornfully he mocked my fears,
      ‘Raise the banner!--up and fight!
    Follow me through blood and tears!’
      From the darkness into light,
    After him, I strove apace,
    Now I cover up his face.

    In his eyes I dare not gaze,
      Lest I should see mirrored there
    All the white and hungry blaze
      Of my own eyes’ hot despair,
    All my shame for his disgrace--
    So I cover up his face.

    In my heart he lies in state,
      Purple sorrow is his pall,
    Trumps of doom and drums of fate
      Sound the dead-march of his fall--
    On his livid brows a crown
    Of withered bays and laurels brown.

    At his head tall candles burn,
      They are hopes that slowly die,
    At his feet the brazen urn
      Where my love’s best ashes lie,
    At his side the broken sword
    Of his own most solemn word.

    Fallen hero, I would bring
      Dreams to deck thine obsequies,
    Lay them as an offering
      On thy heart, where sorrow lies,
    But ’twould spoil thy stately bed,
    For, like thee, my dreams are dead.

    Sound the trumpet, beat the drum,
      Lay the purple on his breast,
    Bow before his shame, and come
      To perform each last behest,
    Give him royal resting-place--
    But, O cover up his face!




6. ‘I Am Alpha and Omega....’


    And dost Thou bless the end? O Lord of Life
      And the Beginning, Lord of the New Birth,
      Lord of the dancing April days of earth!
    When the sour chills of Autumn winds are rife,
    And Summer faints and withers in the strife
      Of tempests and the strangling grips of dearth,
                  Dost Thou still bless the End?

    O Lord of the world’s morning!--Thou canst bless,
      Birth-pangs and travail--Thou hast hallowed all--
      But canst Thou bless the turning to the wall
    Of dying eyes? the panting slow distress
    Of those who fear the clutch of Nothingness?
      When into death’s cold deeps Thy servants fall,
                  Dost Thou still bless the End?

    And canst Thou bless the hour when love is dead?
      Thou seek’st the harmonies of new-strung lyres,
      Thou art the guardian of new-kindled fires,
    But when the last of love’s poor life is fled,
    His ashes to the four winds scatterèd,
      And my charred soul crept bleeding from the pyres,
                  Dost Thou still bless the End?

    Yea, Thou dost bless the End--For Thou hast sworn
      That Thou, Eternal, art the First and Last,
      Lord of the Future, Thine too is the past,
    Thine is the night, O high priest of the dawn!
    Alpha and Omega! both love new-born
      And love long dead are in Thy hands kept fast,
                  Yea, Thou dost bless the End.

    Thine are the shadows of the dropping night,
      Thine are the wastes of lonely moonless seas,
      The wilted leaves of tossing Autumn trees,
    Thine the faint cries, the slowly drowning sight
    Of those who in the gulfs of darkness fight--
      And dead love sleeps upon Thy mighty knees
                  Ever world without end.




CANT SONGS




The Scampsman’s Night


    Mists on the marsh are gathering thick,
      The shuddering woods are dim,
      My barker’s muzzle looks grim,
    Of boozing and delling and such I’m sick.

    Saddle my mare--my Marjorie--
      For Oliver’s glim is bright,
      And this is a snaffling night--
    Ho, my girl, for the nuttiest spree!

    We’ll make his Lordship tip us the bit,
      We’ll knuckle his mort’s fawnie,
      And a kiss, for we’re gay dogs, we,
    And love to fool with a comely chit.

    At morning’s dawn we will ride to our ken,
      And tipple, and count our swag,
      And of our flash spices brag,
    And rest the bodies of mares and men.




A Deuced Moral Lay


    Oh lads that are quier on the rum-padding lay,
    That saddle your prancers at waning of day,
      That ride to the tavern at dawning,
      Take warning,
    For a dell with a scampsman the dickens ’ull play.

    In gaol a full dozen of rum-pads are lying,
    And for Dolly and Molly and Polly are sighing,
      But those very same troublesome fair
      Sent ’em there,
    And they’ll all curse their morts when it comes to the dying.

    Let the gemman who wants to bing wide of the crap
    Beware of his dell, for she’s certain to rap--
      There I’ve tipped you a deuced moral lay,
      So good day,
    I’m off to lie soft in my Barbara’s lap.




Cast for Lag


    On the Pamunkey’s pine-fringed shore--
    Lord! how drear is the torrent’s roar!
    Sits the gentleman rum-pad, slave,
    Watching the leap of the restless wave,
                And sighing for his Jenny.

    Cast for lag was this scampsman bold,
    Flung in a slaver’s stinking hold,
    Kicked and flogged like a vagrant cur--
    That was hard on a gentleman, Sir,
                Who sighed for pretty Jenny.

    Bought by a planter and driven away
    Many a mile on a sweltering day,
    Lashed to a negro, foul and black,
    Each time I stumbled the whip on my back,
                Lord! how I sighed for Jenny.

    Set to work in the sugar canes,
    Hunger, thirst, and the sun’s hot pains,
    Bed at night with a filthy crew,
    Tumble and toss and sweat and stew,
                And wretched dreams of Jenny.

    Thus the miserable days go by,
    Grinding toil ’neath a torrid sky,
    Pain and hate, thirst and hunger wild,
    Tears at night like a beaten child--
                Pray for me, pretty Jenny!




To a Comrade Sped


    Oh you fool, you! Who’d have thought it!
      Dangling like a dog on string.
    That poor spice, you’ve dearly bought it--
      Lad, how does it feel to swing?

    Did you kick when the hemp choked you,
      And your heels danced in the air,
    And the sweat of dying soaked you,
      Struggling on the three-legged mare?

    Swear you did! Your grin, my Billy,
      Is not what it ought to be,
    Thus to show your teeth is silly,
      And not over good to see.

    Dolly wouldn’t kiss that cheek, Sir,
      With the veins swelled out so black,
    Pretty Bab would squirm and shriek, Sir,
      At the scars upon your back--

    Which you had in gaol, my beauty,
      Ere you gambolled on the crap,
    Lud! the Sheriff did his duty,
      Ordered you both rope and strap.

    For you held the roads a-trembling,
      Billy with the face so black;
    Ah, I hear you--‘No dissembling!
      Tip the steven--don’t be slack!’

    Blowens screamed, and gemmen cursed you,
      But you caved ’em with your pop,
    Now, alas! the hemp has burst you,
      Ere you reaped your nutty crop.

    Oh you fool, you! Who’d have thought it!
      Bowled out, trussed up, stark, and dead.
    Ruffler crack, Egad! you’ve caught it,
      Caught it fairly on the head.




MISCELLANEOUS




Bride’s Song


    It was not always thus I loved,
      Once, long ago, another love was mine,
    A love that through the constellations moved
      On fiery way divine--
    It was not always thus I loved.
                But can a bird for ever fly?
                Too rare, too lofty, is the sky,
                The poor bird folds his tired wings,
                And in the tree-top sings,
                And tries
                To forget the skies.

    It was not always thus I dreamed,
      Once, long ago, I walked in Paradise,
    And through the coolness of the garden gleamed
      An angel’s beckoning eyes--
    It was not always thus I dreamed.
                But can the sun be ever bright?
                He faints before the sword of night,
                And back into the house we hie,
                And with a candle try,
                When day’s done,
                To forget the sun.

    I went into the sunset, and I heard
    Among the trees the faint note of a bird.




Immortality


    One star upon the desert of the sky,
      One song upon the silences of night,
      Upon the tossing of the stream, one light,
    One moment in a blank eternity.

    For, O my love, eternity is drear,
      And soon we both shall weary of it so,
    That we shall turn and hide ourselves for fear
      In that sweet hour God gave us long ago.

    We cannot wander from it very far,
      For down the long wild ways, it calls us home,
    Red through the evening like a fallen star,
      A dim undying hearth for loves that roam.

    I feel were I to meet you I might not
      Even know you in the street, nor you know me--
      You might look back and whisper, ‘Who is she?’
    And I might sigh at something half forgot.

    But in our Moment I can kiss your face,
      Smiling and strong--unchanged by all the years;
    And I can hold you there a little space,
      And you hold me--unchanged by all my tears.

    And I can whisper to you of that night
      When our dark boat made moon-swept waters hiss.
      Your face was wet with spray, spray-wet your kiss,
    Your eyes were stars that I had set alight.

    Dim planets hung above the trembling trees,
      The suck of water shook the misty air,
      The darkness showed you magic in my hair,
    The darkness showed you rest upon my knees.

    We saw two wandering stars fall through the sky--
      ’Twas you and I, lost in the chilly haze,
      Apart, adrift, forsaken, but ablaze
    With one short hour’s eternal ecstacy.

    And into our poor love of rags and tears
      The fire of life and deathless love rushed down,
    Rushed the great love of this world’s million years,
      Gave us the kingdom, set on us the crown--

    Gave us all love of lovers since the morn
      Of love in the dim daybreak of the earth,
      Gave us all harmonies since music’s birth,
    Gave us all colours since the first red dawn--

    Gave us the Springtime with its changing tunes,
    Gave us the mysteries of many Junes,
    Gave us the stars, gave us the trackless sea,
    Gave us each other to eternity.

    Love may be gone, as you are gone, my dear,
      But our almighty moment cannot die--
    It shall stand fast when the last crumbling sphere
      Shall crash out of the ruin of the sky.

    When the last constellations faint and fall,
      When the last planets burst in fiery foam,
    When all the winds have sunk asleep, when all
      The worn way-weary comets have come home--

    When past and present and the future flee,
      My moment lives! and I shall hold you there.
    It lives to be my immortality,
      An immortality which you shall share.

    One star upon the desert of the sky,
      One song upon the silences of night,
      Upon the tossing of the stream, one light,
    One moment in a blank eternity.




The Optimist


    The earth is green, the earth is wide,
      And when its widest bound is past,
    There are the stars on every side,
      For soaring souls to win at last--
    There is no bound for those that fly,
    Floorless and roofless is the sky,
      Hope knows no hindrance but clipped wings,
    So, throughout all life’s little while,
    My heart is happy, and I smile,
                  In spite of many things,
    In spite of pain,
      In spite of fears,
        In spite of want,
          In spite of tears
            --In spite of you.

    Mine is the future, and the past,
      The growing and the dying gleam,
    Mine is ambition till the last,
      And there are dreams for me to dream.
    Mine is the sagging Winter day,
    Mine too the softness of the May,
      The lusty strength of bread and wine,
    The valiant dawn, the pondering night,
    The flowering change from dark to light,
                  All holy things are mine,
    In spite of pain,
      In spite of fears,
        In spite of want,
          In spite of tears
            --In spite of you.

    Adventure weaves the shining dress
      Experience at last shall wear,
    Grief, rapture, triumph, bitterness
      Combine to trace the pattern there.
    All sorrow that my soul assails
    Helps to embroider golden veils
      To deck me in the glorious day
    When I shall reign in endless rest,
    So strength and laughter fill my breast,
                  And on my heartstrings play,
    In spite of pain,
      In spite of fears,
        In spite of want,
          In spite of tears
              --In spite of you.




Resurrection


    By the grave I watch and weep,
      Watch and weep in anxious pain,
    Watch my Love’s exhausted sleep,
      Weep lest he should wake again--
    With heart and mind and soul I dread
    The resurrection of the dead.

    Is it a hard law of Thine
      That no third day’s dawn shall break
    Without bringing life divine
      To the dead? O for the sake
    Of all Thy thorns and lilies won,
    Let my weary one sleep on!

    Rough was life for my poor love,
      Fierce the whirlwind, wild the wave,
    It was mercy from above
      That he found this quiet grave,
    And there laid him down to rest,
    In the earth’s consoling breast.

    He is desperate for sleep.
      He would never choose to wake,
    And I watch by him and weep,
      Trembling lest the light should break
    In the merciful dark skies,
    And torment his heavy eyes.

    Though I know that Christ the Lord
      On the third day rose again,
    And I fear it is His word
      That the crucified should reign,
    Yet to Him I humbly pray
    That my love shall sleep for aye.

    For he never was a king,
      Never sat upon a throne,
    He was just a trodden thing,
      Stumbling in the dark alone.
    Let him rest--Eternal bliss?--
    He is far too tired for this.

    Life is for the gods and great,
      Resurrection for the strong,
    Joy for those of high estate,
      Slaves would rather slumber long.
    Let no angel from above
    Wake the sleeping slave--my love.

    By the grave I watch and weep,
      Watch and weep in anxious pain,
    Watch my love’s exhausted sleep,
      Weep lest he should wake again--
    With heart and mind and soul I dread
    The resurrection of the dead.




A Prayer


   Lord, let me die on my feet--upright and boldly facing
     My last sad great adventure and experience’s crown,
   Let my eyes be all undimmed as they look into the darkness,
     Let me hail death as a conqueror before he strikes me down.

   Let me die with my head up, sword drawn, my shield flung from me,
     Stout to the end, yet proud to win my discharge at last,
   With worshipping clear gaze let me run to meet the future,
     And with forgiving laughter make my farewells to the past.

   Let me not die in my bed, in weariness and weakness,
     While outside, undesired, unheard, all valiant nature calls,
   Save me from tumbled sheets, drawn blinds, and muffled footsteps,
     From staring eyes to pity me when the last anguish falls.

   Lord let me die in my boots, I care not where death meets me,
     But let me die upright and armed, with free unclouded mind,
   Let me relish in their fullness the last moments life shall give me,
     Then plunge on without vain regrets for vain things left behind.

   Let me meet death on the waters, in the din of the waves’ roaring,
     In the shattering of the thunder, when the splitting timbers break,
   Let me meet him on the mountains, on the shrieking snow-storm riding,
     I care not where he finds me, if he find me but awake.

   I care not how I meet him, if I meet him as a warrior,
     Not as a slave the master he has given cause to frown.
   I will challenge him to combat, and when he sees me fearless,
     He will hail me as a conqueror before he strikes me down.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLOW'S FORGE, AND OTHER POEMS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


